VOL XIII NLIU LAW REVIEW ISSUE I NAVIGATING THE INTRICACIES OF THE DEFECTION
CONUNDRUM: AN INSIGHT INTO MAHARASHTRA’S POLITICAL TURMOIL Parth Birla* and
Ananya Badaya** ABSTRACT Defection is one of the biggest roadblock for any
democracy and is not a new phenomenon in the world’s biggest democracy, India.
The country has seen regular defections since 1967 due to the caprice of
MP’s/MLA’s who had switched their allegiances away from the parties they backed
during the election, or refused to support their party in risky situations, such
as casting votes on a no confidence motion. This forced the parliament to
interpolate the Anti-Defection Law i.e. the Tenth Schedule in the Constitution
of the country in 1985. The Anti-Defection law in India failed to keep up the
expectations of the electorate and made the en bloc defections more frequent.
The Tenth Schedule in its current state is in shambles. The present democracy is
the “aye ram gaya ram” democracy where the MLAs are looking for *Parth Birla is
a third-year B.A. LLB. (Hons.) student at the Hidayatullah National Law
University, Raipur. The author may be reached at Parth.212580@hnlu.ac.in.
**Ananya Badaya is a third-year B.A. LLB. (Hons.) student at the Hidayatullah
National Law University, Raipur. The author may be reached at
Ananya.212591@hnlu.ac.in. 218 PARTH BIRLA AND ANANYA BADAYA NAVIGATING THE
INTRICACIES OF THE DEFECTION CONUNDRUM ways to escape from the anti-defection
law. The current situation in Maharashtra is another example of how the MLAs are
finding ways to make the anti-defection law ineffective. The law which was once
thought to be impeccable is now easily penetrable. Unless the required amendment
is not made, the spirit of democracy could vanish in the upcoming years. The
paper focuses on the problem that has arisen in the landscape of Maharashtra’s
Politics and the ineffectiveness of the Anti Defection law to deal with the
current situation. It also tries to dissect the Supreme Court judgment
pertaining to the apparent quagmire of ‘Split without Merger’ in the Shiv Sena
camp. Keywords: Defection, Tenth Schedule, Anti Defection Law, Split without
Merger, Lure of Office, Horse Trading, Time-Bound Redressal Mechanism I.
INTRODUCTION The structure of Indian politics is a complex area to study. The
multi party system in the nation has benefits and drawbacks of its own. While it
provides a voter with additional options to improve democracy by allowing them
to choose their representatives from numerous parties, it also leads to
corruption, mistrust, horse-trading, etc.1 One of the 1Rajendra Kumar Meena,
Vinja Ram Solanki and Mamta Meena, ‘Horse Trading: An Attack On The Indian
Democracy’ II (II) Indian Journal of Integrated Research in Law
<https://ijirl.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/HORSE-TRADING-AN
ATTACK-ON-THE-INDIAN-DEMOCRACY.pdf> accessed 13 December 2023. 219 VOL XIII NLIU
LAW REVIEW ISSUE I biggest problems that Indian politics has faced is defection.
It is one such phenomenon that has significantly undermined the notion of
democracy and insults the mandate of the public. As per the Constitutional
expert H.M. Seervai, “defection in India generally took place because political
support is sold for money or promise of ministership or public office”.2 A
defector may be defined as “a person who gives up allegiance to one party in
exchange for allegiance to another, changing sides in a way which is considered
illegitimate by the first party.”3 Though it is assumed that defection takes
place due to change in the ideology of members from their party, the authors
opine that the main motive behind defection is to topple the incumbent
government and enjoy material rewards as quid pro quo such as money, cabinet
positions etc. To uphold the sanctity of democracy and curb the menace of
defection, the Parliament passed the 52nd Amendment Bill, 1985,4 which inserted
the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution, also known as the Anti Defection law.5
Since defection undermines the very foundations of our democracy and the
principles which sustain it, the need was felt for an anti-defection law.6 While
the Tenth Schedule lists down the methods through which the member can be
disqualified from the assembly, it also provides for ‘Split’ and ‘Mergers’ among
parties as the exception to the anti-defection law.7 These exceptions, the
authors feel, are big loopholes because of which the members of political
parties have gained undue benefits and become the source of mass defection. The
2HM Seervai, Constitutional Law of India: A Critical Commentary, Volume 3 (4th
edn, Universal Law Publishing 1996). 3 ‘Defect’ (Merriam-Webester)
<https://www.merriam webster.com/dictionary/defector> accessed 28 August 2023.
4The Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985 (22 of 1985). 5Paras Diwan,
‘Aya Ram Gaya Ram: The Politics of Defection’ (1979) 21(3) Journal of the Indian
Law Institute 291-312 <https://www.jstor.org/stable/43950639>. 6The Constitution
(Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985 (22 of 1985). 7Shanthan Reddy, ‘Merger
Exception to Defection – Obstacle or Facilitator?’ (Law and Other Things, 21
January 2022) <https://lawandotherthings.com/merger
exception-to-defection-obstacle-or-facilitator/> accessed 13 December 2023. 220
PARTH BIRLA AND ANANYA BADAYA NAVIGATING THE INTRICACIES OF THE DEFECTION
CONUNDRUM only good that came out of the amendment was that it made individual
defections rare. However, contrary to the intended purpose, en bloc defections
became frequent.8 Another area for scrutiny under the current anti-defection law
is the role of the Speaker, who is the adjudicating authority to decide the
cases of defection and decides the same impartially.9 The question of prejudice
arises in the defection proceedings as the Speaker, being the partisan, favours
the ruling party in most of the cases of defection.10 In Kihoto Hollohan v.
Zachillu,11 the minority opined that the “tenure of the Speaker, who is the
authority in the Tenth Schedule to decide this dispute, is dependent on the
continuous support of the majority in the House and, therefore, he does not
satisfy the requirement of such an independent adjudicatory authority.”
Therefore, the adjudicating power of the Speaker is also one of the reasons for
the sordid drama of defection. The recent development in Maharashtra politics
exposes the lacunae of the Tenth Schedule, wherein the issue of mass defections
once again came to light. This has resulted in filing of disqualification
petition against the MLAs, leading to creation of two factions, both claiming to
be the real Shiv Sena. The faction consisting of defecting MLAs did not merge
with any party, which ensued a situation of ‘Split without a 8B Venkatesh Kumar,
‘Anti-Defection Law: Welcome Reforms’ (2003) 38(19) Economic & Political Weekly
<https://www.epw.in/journal/2003/19/commentary/anti-defection-lawwelcome
reforms.html> accessed 28 August 2023. 9Charith Reddy and Shagun Bhargava, ‘For
Laws May Come and Laws May Go, But Defections Go on Forever: A Critical Analysis
of the Role of the Speaker in Indian Anti-Defection Laws’ X(I) NLIU Law Review
328 <https://nliulawreview.nliu.ac.in/for-laws-may-come-and-laws-may-go-but
defections-go-on-forever-a-critical-analysis-of-the-role-of-speaker-in-the-indian
anti-defection-laws/> accessed 28 August 2023. 10Umang Poddar, ‘Explainer: How
speakers are undermining the anti-defection law by simply sitting on petitions’
(Scroll.in, 14 December 2021)
<https://scroll.in/article/1012515/explainer-howspeakers-are-undermining-the
antidefection-law-by -simply-sitting-on-petitions> accessed 28 Aug 2023.
11Kihoto Hollohan v Zachillu (1992) SCR (1) 686. 221 VOL XIII NLIU LAW REVIEW
ISSUE I Merger’. This problem is much bigger than it seems because the
provisions in the Anti-Defection law regarding the same are unclear on the
current situation. This paper traces the evolution of the anti-defection law and
also analyses the Maharashtra political crisis in light of the recent Supreme
Court judgement12 about the same issue. It also delves into the lacunae of the
judgement and proposes possible solutions to the quandary. This paper is divided
into three parts wherein the first part addresses the need for Anti-Defection
Law in India. In the second part, it discusses the provisions of the
Anti-Defection Law, in order to have a proper base to analyse the lacunae in the
given law. The third part delves into the recent issue in Maharashtra wherein
the authors analyse the judgement of the Hon’ble Supreme Court on this issue.
The authors conclude by propounding possible solutions to tackle such issues in
the future. II. ADDRESSING POLITICAL VOLATILITY: THE IMPERATIVE FOR
ANTI-DEFECTION LAW Before delving into the lacunae of Tenth Schedule which led
to the Maharashtra crisis, there is a need to look at the events leading up to
the introduction of the anti-defection law to comprehend the need for the same.
India established a democratic form of government after gaining its
independence. As political parties and democracy go hand in hand, they form an
essential part of the success of any democracy. Additionally, for the effective
functioning of a political party, it is a cardinal rule that all party members
must abide by the whip issued by the party.13 A whip, as used in parliamentary
language, is a formal order 12Shubhash Desai v Principal Secretary, Governor of
Maharashtra & Ors. (2023) SCC OnLine SC 607. 13Explained Desk, ‘What is a whip
in a State Assembly or Parliament’ The Indian Express (New Delhi, 2 March 2023)
<https://indianexpress.com/article/explained/everyday-explainers/what-whip-state
assembly-parliament-8473933/> accessed 28 August 2023. 222 PARTH BIRLA AND
ANANYA BADAYA NAVIGATING THE INTRICACIES OF THE DEFECTION CONUNDRUM ordering
party members to participate in contested sessions or to vote in a specific
manner.14 In the first three general elections, Congress won with a resounding
majority. Even then, there were still a few cases of defections, albeit the
balance of power being largely unaffected.15 However, the fiasco of mass
defections began in 1967, which was the last time both State Assembly and
General elections took place simultaneously.16 In that year, State Assemblies
saw large-scale defections, and the monopoly that Congress had previously
enjoyed abruptly vanished due to the emergence of coalition politics. From 1967
to 1972, more than half of India’s legislators changed sides at least once
wherein approximately 2,000 defections and counter-defections were witnessed,17
compared to just approximately 500 defections before 1967, which were largely
observed in the States.18 On the 8th of December 1967, a high-level committee of
18 members was appointed by the Lok Sabha under the chairmanship of Y.B. Chavan
to look into the issue of political defections. It submitted its report in 1969
and defined defection as “the voluntary giving up of allegiance of a political
party on whose symbol a legislator was elected, except when such action was the
result of the decision of the 14ibid. 15C N Bhalerao, ‘The Developing Pattern of
the Congress Party’ (1964) 16 (12) The Economic and Political Weekly
<https://www.epw.in/system/files/pdf/1964_16/12/the_developing_pattern_of_the_
congress_party.pdf?0=ip_login_no_cache%3D569ce655eea7907ce3dc8772854b57 50>
accessed 28 August 2023. 16Bibek Debroy and Kishore Desai, ‘Analysis of
Simultaneous Elections: The “What”, “Why” And “How”‘ (Department of Legal
Affairs),
<https://legalaffairs.gov.in/sites/default/files/simultaneous_elections/NITI_AYOG_
REPORT_2017.pdf> accessed 28 August 2023. 17Paras Diwan, ‘Aya Ram Gaya Ram: The
Politics of Defection’ (1979) 21(3) Journal of the Indian Law Institute 291-312
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/43950639>. 18HR Saviprasad and Vinay Reddy, ‘The
Law on Anti-Defection: An Appraisal’ (1999) 11 Student ADVOC 116
<https://heinonline.org/HOL/LandingPage?handle=hein.journals/nlsind11&div=15
&id=&page=> accessed 28 August 2023. 223 VOL XIII NLIU LAW REVIEW ISSUE I
party.”19 It also mandated political parties to have a suitable code of conduct
within the party for accountability and integrity, and stated that defectors
should be removed from their seats, but permitted to run for office again if
they defect on ideological grounds.20 However, if the defector did so for
monetary benefit or the promise of a position, he shall be disqualified and
prohibited from running for office again for six years, as per the Committee.
Further, the committee recommended that the size of the Council of Ministers in
a government be limited, and that the Council of Ministers and not the Prime
Minister or Chief Minister, should have the authority to dissolve the House.21
The Committee provided political, constitutional and legislative measures to
deal with the issue of defections. But these recommendations were not accepted
and no action on defection could be taken despite there being attempts to enact
these recommendations through the Thirty Second22 and the Forty Forth23
Amendment Bills, but the same could not be passed due to strong opposition at
that time.24 III. MULTIFACETED ASPECTS OF THE TENTH SCHEDULE With the rising
defections and abrupt political turmoil in the country, there arose a dire need
for an anti-defection law. Mr. Rajiv Gandhi was adamant about resolving the
problem of defection and therefore in 1984, when he came into power, he proposed
a law to counter the 19YB Chavan, ‘Report of the Committee on Defections’
(Ministry of Culture)
<https://indianculture.gov.in/reports-proceedings/report-committee-defections>
accessed 28 August 2023. 20Ibid; Chaksu Roy, ‘Explained: In Maharashtra drama,
the key legal provision anti defection law’ The Indian Express (New Delhi, 24
November 2019)
<https://indianexpress.com/article/explained/explained-in-maharashtra-drama-the
key-legal-provision-anti-defection-law-6133417/> accessed 28 August 2023. 21S
Mohan Kumaramangalam, ‘The Governor and His Ministers’ (1967) 2(46) Economic and
Political Weekly 2059-2061 <http://www.jstor.org/stable/24478341> accessed 28
August 2023. 22The Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973. 23The
Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978. 24HM Seervai, Constitutional
Law of India: A Critical Commentary, Volume 3 (4th edn, Universal Law Publishing
1996). 224 PARTH BIRLA AND ANANYA BADAYA NAVIGATING THE INTRICACIES OF THE
DEFECTION CONUNDRUM menace of defection. The Bill was passed unanimously,
leading to the insertion of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution, which led to
changes in Articles 101, 102, 190 and 191 of the Constitution of India. Article
101 of the Constitution25 deals with the vacation of seats and a new clause was
inserted for vacation under the application of Article 102(2) of the
Constitution. Article 10226 specifies the grounds for disqualification, and the
said amendment added defection as the ground of disqualification. On the same
lines, Articles 190 and 191, which apply to the State Assemblies,27 also went
through similar changes. The Tenth Schedule enlists grounds for the
disqualification of MPs and MLAs, which are specified under Para 2(1)28 of the
Schedule. They are as follows: 1. Voluntary giving up of membership of the House
by an elected member.29 2. A member of the party votes contrary to the whip.
However, he can avoid disqualification if prior approval was given by the party
or the party condoned the act within 15 days.30 3. An independent member, if he
joins any other political party.31 4. A nominated person, if he joins any
political party after the expiry of 6 months from the date from which he holds
the seat.32 A member can escape from the above grounds if: 25The Constitution of
India, 1950 art 101. 26The Constitution of India, 1950 art 102. 27Parliament
Library and Reference, Research, Documentation and Information Service,
‘Anti-defection law in India’ (July 2022)
<https://loksabhadocs.nic.in/Refinput/New_Reference_Notes/English/15072022_11
1659_1021205175.pdf> accessed 12 December 2023. 28The Constitution of India,
1950, Tenth Schedule, para 2(1). 29The Constitution of India, 1950, Tenth
Schedule, para 2(1)(a). 30The Constitution of India, 1950, Tenth Schedule, para
2(1)(b). 31The Constitution of India, 1950, Tenth Schedule, para 2(2). 32ibid.
225 VOL XIII NLIU LAW REVIEW ISSUE I 1. There is a split33 in the political
party. This exception will not apply when the split faction contains less than
one-third of the total members in the house of that political party. 2. There is
a merger.34 This exception will not apply when the faction which has merged with
the other political party has less than two thirds of the total strength of the
party in the legislature. 3. The member resigns from his/her political party
just before his/her election as the Speaker/ Deputy Speaker/ Chairman/ Deputy
Chairman.35 While there seems to be adequate protections against political
defections by virtue of the enactment of the Tenth Schedule, it is saddening
that the menace of defection persists in the Indian democracy even after such an
enactment, primarily by virtue of the escaping provisions available under the
same. For instance, in the year 1991, 22 members of the Congress party and 12
members of the Bahujan Samaj Party defected from their parties in the Uttar
Pradesh Legislative Assembly and they were not disqualified by the speaker due
to the provision of ‘Split’.36 Similar instances were prevailing all over the
country which led to the introduction of the Ninety First Amendment Bill in
2003,37 which was subsequently passed in the Parliament to remove the provision
of ‘Split’. The Bill was introduced under the leadership of Prime Minister Atal
Bihari Vajpayee, who formed a Committee under Mr. Pranab Mukherjee to examine
the Bill. The Committee observed that the lure of office and horse trading were
the major factors leading to defections and counter-defections in the 33The
Constitution of India, 1950, Tenth Schedule, para 3. Para 3 was later omitted by
the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003. 34The Constitution of
India, 1950, Tenth Schedule, para 4. 35The Constitution of India, 1950, Tenth
Schedule, para 5. 36Ian Duncan, ‘New Political Equations in North India:
Mayawati, Mulayam, and Government Instability in Uttar Pradesh’ (1997) 37(10)
Asian Survey 979-996 <https://www.jstor.org/stable/2645617> accessed 28 August
2003. 37The Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Bill, 1978. 226 PARTH BIRLA
AND ANANYA BADAYA NAVIGATING THE INTRICACIES OF THE DEFECTION CONUNDRUM country
and the provision of ‘Split’ was grossly misused by the members.38 For instance,
in the 1990s, Goa was the hotspot of mass defection resulting in continuous
change in power. From 1990 to 2002, thirteen different governments were formed
in Goa. 39 The aforesaid amendment, in addition to removing the exception of
Split, added the advice of the Y.B Chavan Committee, limiting the number of the
Council of Ministers up to 15% (the provision was added in Article 75(1A) of the
Constitution).40 Thus, it could be said that the amendment partially resolved
the problem, as the issue involving the provision of Merger remained untouched.
It was presumed that the requirement of two-third members of a political party
for a valid merger shall prevent mass defections. However, the presumption
turned out to be inappropriate since it further exacerbated the issue, thereby
paving the way for en bloc defections in place of small defections. To
illustrate, in 2016, 44 out of 45 Congress MLAs merged with the People’s Party
in Arunachal Pradesh,41 in 2021, 12 out of 17 Congress MLAs merged with the
Trinamool Congress in Meghalaya.42 Similarly, in 2022, 8 out of 11 Congress MLAs
joined the BJP by passing a resolution to merge the Congress party with the BJP
in the 38Chakshu Roy, ‘Explained: The Limits of Anti-Defection’ The Indian
Express (25 July 2019)
<https://indianexpress.com/article/explained/explained-the-limits-of-anti
defection-karnataka-5849316/> accessed 28 August 2023. 39Anil Sastry, ‘A history
of instability’ The Frontline (25 February 2005)
<https://frontline.thehindu.com/politics/article30203733.ece> accessed 28 August
2023. 40The Constitution (Ninety-First Amendment) Act, 2003. 41Anuja, ‘Congress
loses Arunachal as chief minister, 43 MLAs defect to BJP “ally”‘ Mint (17
September 2016)
<https://www.livemint.com/Politics/hX40OqyuxZKwiudAS8FOvO/Arunachal
Pradesh-Congress-in-turmoil-again-as-CM-Khandu-4.html> accessed 28 August 2023.
42The Wire Staff, ‘Meghalaya: 12 of 17 Congress MLAs, Led By Ex CM Mukul Sangma,
Jump Ship to TMC’ The Wire (25 Nov 2021)
<https://thewire.in/politics/meghalaya-12-of-17-congress-mlas-led-by-ex-cm
mukul-sangma-jump-ship-to-tmc> accessed 29 August 2023. 227 VOL XIII NLIU LAW
REVIEW ISSUE I Legislative Assembly of Goa.43 The above instances depict the
pervasiveness of mass defections all over the country for a long period. The
other pertinent issue that demands discussion is the decisive role played by the
Speaker in disqualification proceedings. Such proceedings are decided at the
discretion of the Speaker,44 who holds the proceeding of disqualification in the
light of Articles 102 and 191 in consonance with the provisions of the Tenth
Schedule. The Speaker is not constrained by the passage of time, and it is just
provided that he has to decide on disqualification within reasonable time.45
While reasonable time can be subjective, the Supreme Court, in a recent
judgment,46 clarified that “What is reasonable will depend on the facts of each
case, but absent exceptional circumstances for which there is good reason, a
period of three months from the date on which the petition is filed.” However, a
Speaker cannot determine the question of disqualification suo moto, but only
when a petition for disqualification is filed by a member of the House.47 In the
landmark judgment of Kihoto Hollohan v. Zallichu,48 the Court asserted the issue
of whether the speaker’s power violates basic structure doctrine or not and
whether the Speaker’s decision is subject to judicial review or not. The Court
while deciding the issues opined that “The Speakers/Chairmen hold a pivotal
position in the scheme of Parliamentary democracy and are guardians of the
rights and 43PTI, ‘Merger of group of eight Cong MLAs with BJP in Goa as per
constitutional norms: Speaker Tawadkar’ The Indian Express (Panaji, 12 October
2022) <https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/goa/merger-congress-mlas-bjp-goa
constitutional-norms-speaker-tawadkar-8203729/> accessed 29 August 2023. 44The
Constitution of India, 1950, Tenth Schedule, para 6(1). 45Udisha Mishra,
‘Anti-Defection Law: Analysis of the Role of Speaker’ IRALR
<https://www.iralr.in/post/anti-defection-law-analysis-of-the-role-of-speaker>
accessed 29 August 2023. 46Keisham Meghachandra Singh v Hon’ble Speaker Manipur
Legislative Assembly and Others (2020) SCC OnLine SC 55. 47Babulal Marandi v
Speaker, Jharkhand Vidhan Sabha (2020) SCC OnLine Jhar 1017. 48Kihoto Hollohan v
Zachillu (1992) SCR (1) 686. 228 PARTH BIRLA AND ANANYA BADAYA NAVIGATING THE
INTRICACIES OF THE DEFECTION CONUNDRUM privileges of the House.”49 The majority
ruled that the speaker’s decision will be subject to judicial review only when
there have been some judicial errors based on constitutional mandates, mala
fides, and non-compliance with natural justice.50 The Court, through the above
judgement, upheld the power of the Speaker to decide the matters of
disqualification albeit adding restraints to the power of the Speaker by making
him subject to judicial review in certain situations. Nevertheless, it is
essential to mention that the role of the Speaker is always under the scanner
due to partial decisions taken by him in favour of the ruling party. Even the
Supreme Court observed the same and noted that “there is a growing trend of the
Speaker acting against the constitutional duty of being neutral.”51 To sum up,
the anti defection law which was introduced after a lot of hardships still
failed to curb the mass defections that led to political upheavals throughout
the country. IV. UNRAVELLING THE MAHARASHTRA CRISIS The sordid drama of
defection continued and it once again disrupted the political equations in
Maharashtra, which has witnessed political instability since the 2019 State
Assembly elections. There has been a division in Shiv Sena (“Sena”), with one
faction forming a coalition with their age-old political ally, the Bhartiya
Janata Party (“BJP”). The current defections have created a major conundrum in
the politics of the state as both factions of the party are claiming to be the
Real Shiv Sena. To understand the current scenario, there is first a need to
delve into the history of the BJP-Sena relations. BJP and Sena shared a poignant
relationship establishing their alliance in the 1984 elections.52 Balasaheb
Thackery, leader of the Sena, formed 49ibid. 50ibid. 51Shrimanth Balasaheb Patil
v Hon’ble Speaker, Karnataka Legislative Assembly (2020) 2 SCC 595 para 152 (i).
52Prabhash K Dutta, ‘35 years of Shiv Sena-BJP alliance: Hindutva proposes,
rivalry 229 VOL XIII NLIU LAW REVIEW ISSUE I an agreement with the BJP leaders
L.K. Advani and Atal Vajpayee to allow some members of the Sena to contest the
elections under the symbol of BJP.53 ‘Hindutva’ was the binding force that
aligned both parties to ally again in the 1989 elections.54 The coalition lost
the election with Sena and BJP bagging 52 and 42 seats respectively. The
coalition won its first election in 1995,55 in a highly polarized background,
due to the Babri Masjid incident and the Bombay Blast involving communal rights
in 1993. Sena’s Manohar Joshi became the Chief Minister as per the condition set
out by Bal Thackery that the party which won more seats would take the post of
Chief Minister.56 Throughout their tenure, there were various conflicts among
the parties over seat allocation and policy formulation. The coalition lost the
next election as they tried to sabotage each other’s campaigns to outperform the
other.57 For the next 15 years, the alliance was unable to assume power and a
power struggle for the seat of the opposition leader ensued. In the 2014
elections,58 both parties decided to fight the elections independently, and this
time, the tables turned as BJP bagged 122 seats disposes’ India Today (New
Delhi, 7 November 2019)
<https://www.indiatoday.in/news-analysis/story/35-years-of-shiv-sena-bjp-alliance
hindutva-proposes-rivalry-disposes-1616546-2019-11-07> accessed 29 August 2023.
53ibid. Indian 54Zeeshan Shaikh, ‘BJP longest, but once earlier too Congress was
a Shiv Sena friend’ The Express (Mumbai, 13 October 2022)
<https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/bjp-longest-but-once-earlier-too
congress-was-a-shiv-sena-friend-8204394/> accessed 29 August 2023. 55ibid.
56Venkat Ananth, ‘The anatomy of an alliance: The BJP-Shiv Sena story’ Mint (22
September 2023)
<https://www.livemint.com/Politics/VbrxNc2FSZuGroknO7I97M/The-anatomy-of
an-alliance-The-BJPShiv-Sena-story.html> accessed 29 August 2023. 57IDEA,
‘Democracy and Deep-Rooted Conflict: Options for Negotiations’ (1998)
<https://www.idea.int/sites/default/files/publications/democracy-and-deep-rooted
conflict.pdf> accessed 12 December 2023. 58Shubhangi Khapre, ‘Shiv Sena to join
Fadnavis govt; gives up claim to home minister, deputy CM post’ The Indian
Express (Mumbai, 3 December 2014)
<https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/shiv-sena-to-join-fadnavis-govt
accepts-offer-of-12-cabinet-berths/> accessed 29 August 2023. 230 PARTH BIRLA
AND ANANYA BADAYA NAVIGATING THE INTRICACIES OF THE DEFECTION CONUNDRUM whereas
Sena only managed to win 63 seats.59 The Sena first resisted joining the BJP’s
alliance, but after briefly siding with the opposition, they once again joined
hands. Twelve non-essential ministerial positions were assigned to Sena
ministers in the administration which led to Sena’s continued opposition to the
BJP policies both at the National and State level during their term in
coalition.60 Again in 2019, both decided to form a coalition under the name
Mahayuti.61 National Congress Party (“NCP”) and Indian National Congress (“INC”)
contested under the coalition Maha Aghadi. The outcomes were as follows: Out of
the 288 seats, BJP won 105 seats, while Sena, NCP and Congress won 56, 54 and 44
seats respectively.62 Sena proposed before the polls that the Chief Minister’s
chair should be shared in a 50:50 ratio of tenure. However, the BJP rejected the
power-sharing proposal, claiming Sena had assumed on its own. Due to this
tussle, Sena and BJP parted their ways and with no single party in a position to
form the government, Sena, NCP and Congress also called Maha Vikas Aghadi came
together to form the government. The political experts termed the coalition
‘fragile’ as the political ideologies of the political parties were not aligned
due to which the ideology of Sena had shifted towards Soft Hindutva.63 This
changed 59Aadil Ikram Zaki Iqbal, ‘Maharashtra State Assembly Election Results
2014 Live News Update: BJP Wins 122 Seats, Shiv Sena 63’ India.com (19 October
2022)
<https://www.india.com/news/india/maharashtra-state-assembly-election-results
2014-live-news-update-175245/> accessed 29 August 2023. 60Venkitesh
Ramakrishnan, ‘BJP retired hurt in Maharashtra’ Frontline (4 December 2019)
<https://frontline.thehindu.com/cover-story/article30146629.ece> accessed 29
August 2023. 61PTI, ‘“Mahayuti” will soon form Maharashtra govt: Devendra
Fadnavis’ The Economic Times (Mumbai, 30 October 2019)
<https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/politics-and-nation/mahayuti-will
soon-form-maharashtra-govt
devendrafadnavis/articleshow/71820358.cms?utm_source=contentofinterest&utm_
medium=text&utm_campaign=cppst> accessed 29 August 2023. 62Rishabh Mishra, ‘A
Brief History of Shiv Sena-BJP Alliance of 23 Years’ Republic World (12 November
2019) <https://www.republicworld.com/india-news/politics/a
brief-history-of-shiv-sena-bjp-alliance-of-23-years.html> accessed 29 August
2023. 63Vikas Kumar and Ayesha Jain, ‘“Middlemen”, Pressure Politics, Ideology:
6 231 VOL XIII NLIU LAW REVIEW ISSUE I conduct and ideology of Chief Minister
Uddhav Thackrey led to the resentment of Eknath Shinde (“Shinde”), a senior
leader of Sena and the State’s Urban Affairs Minister. Shinde, along with his
supporters, rebelled against the incumbent government and withdrew their
support.64 Consequently, Sena filed a petition against the rebel MLAs demanding
the disqualification of 16 MLAs from Narahari Zirwal, the Deputy Speaker of the
Maharashtra Assembly (the Speaker post was vacant then).65 The Deputy Speaker
issued notice against 16 MLAs and directed them to file their written
submissions in 2 days. Consequently, those MLAs approached the Supreme Court
against the Deputy Speaker’s notice and the deadline for responses to the
petitions for disqualification was extended by the Court from 27 June 2022 to 12
July 2022.66 On the other hand, the Governor of Maharashtra, Bhagat Singh
Koshyari, at the request of Shinde, ordered the floor test to be conducted on 28
June 2022 believing that the incumbent government has lost the majority in the
House.67 Reasons Behind the Shiv Sena Crisis’ The Quint (23 June 2022)
<https://www.thequint.com/news/politics/six-factors-behind-maharashtra-political
crisis-eknath-shinde-uddhav-thackeray#read-more#read-more> accessed 29 August
2023. 64Vibha Sharma, ‘Maharashtra ruling alliance in turmoil as Sena leader
Shinde rebels; CM Thackeray calls cabinet meet on Wednesday’ The Tribune (New
Delhi, June 2021)
<https://www.tribuneindia.com/news/nation/maha-sena-minister-eknath
shinde-goes-incommunicado-may-be-in-gujarat-with-some-mlas-party-leader 405731>
accessed 29 August 2023. Indian 65Omkar Gokhale, ‘Explained: In Shiv Sena
crisis, the issues before Supreme Court’ The Express (Mumbai, 27 June 2022)
<https://indianexpress.com/article/explained/what-grounds-eknath-shinde-rebel
mla-seeking-relief-supreme-court-7993518/> accessed 29 August 2023. 66Krishnadas
Rajagopal, ‘SC gives Sena rebels time till July 12 to respond to
disqualification notice for defection’ The Hindu (New Delhi, 27 June 2022)
<https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/sc-gives-sena-rebels-time-till-july-12-to
respond-to-disqualification-notice-for-defection/article65570536.ece> accessed
29 August 2023. 67Ayushi Saraogi, ‘SC Refuses to Stay Maharashtra Governor’s
Call for Floor Test’ (Supreme Court Observer, 29 June 2022)
<https://www.scobserver.in/journal/sc
refuses-to-stay-maharashtra-governors-call-for-floor-test/> accessed 29 August
2023. 232 PARTH BIRLA AND ANANYA BADAYA NAVIGATING THE INTRICACIES OF THE
DEFECTION CONUNDRUM The floor test was challenged before the Supreme Court on
account of pending disqualification petitions. However, it refused to put a stay
on the floor test.68 Following the denial of any relief from the Apex Court
against a floor test, Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray resigned from his post one
day before the floor test. As a consequence, Shinde (being supported by BJP and
Independents) was invited by the Governor to prove his majority and form the
government. In the 287-member Assembly, Shinde, who has 39 Sena dissidents
backing him, in addition to the BJP and Independents, secured 164 votes.69 After
that, he assumed the office of Chief Minister with Devendra Fadnavis as his
Deputy. In furtherance of the defection notices sent by the Deputy Speaker,
Shinde demanded a no-confidence motion against the deputy speaker which was
disallowed. Later he approached the Supreme Court and filed a petition for the
same. Subsequently, there had been a writ filed by the Uddhav Thackrey
(“Thackrey”) faction against the Governor’s decision to call for a floor test
and invite Shinde to form the government and allow him to take oath as Chief
Minister of Maharashtra. Moreover, they have also filed another writ challenging
the whip nominated by the Shinde faction, which was declared as the chief whip
of the Sena by the newly elected Maharashtra Assembly Speaker, Rahul Narvekar.70
This ultimately led to a situation where there were two whips of the same party.
68ibid. 69Faisal Malik and Dhaval Kulkarni, ‘Eknath Shinde proves majority in
Maharashtra House’ The Hindustan Times (5 July 2022)
<https://www.hindustantimes.com/india
news/shinde-proves-majority-in-maharashtra-house-101656959215220.html> accessed
29 August 2023. 70Scroll Staff, ‘Uddhav Thackeray group moves SC against
Speaker’s decision to appoint whip backed by Eknath Shinde’ (Scroll, 4 July
2022) <https://scroll.in/latest/1027547/uddhav-thackeray-group-moves-sc-against
speakers-decision-to-appoint-whip-backed-by-eknath-shinde> accessed 29 August
2023. 233 VOL XIII NLIU LAW REVIEW ISSUE I V. DISSECTING THE CONVOLUTIONS OF THE
SUPREME COURT JUDGMENT The above political imbroglio once again exposed the
predicaments of the anti-defection law. The duty to resolve the lacunae of the
anti defection law came into the hands of the Supreme Court through this case as
a large number of writ petitions were filed by both sides. The issues under
these petitions71 were as follows: I. If proceedings of disqualification are
pending against the Speaker, whether the Speaker has the power to disqualify a
member under the Tenth Schedule of the Indian Constitution as held in Nabam
Rebia and Ors. v. Deputy Speaker and Ors.72? II. Whether the courts have the
power to adjudicate upon the disqualification petition filed against MLAs? III.
What authority does the Speaker have to determine the whip and the leader of the
House of the Legislative Party? IV. What is the impact of the removal of Para 3
of the Anti-Defection Law? V. Whether Governor was justified in ordering a floor
test and inviting Eknath Shinde to form the government? Now, the authors shall
enunciate the approach taken by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the order in which
the issues have been identified. To decide upon the first issue, the Court
relied on the case of Nabam Rebia wherein it was held that the Speaker against
whom a no confidence motion was pending cannot adjudicate the disqualification
petition. In the current scenario, the office of the Speaker was vacant and Mr.
Narhari Zirwal, the Deputy Speaker was discharging the 71Shubhash Desai v
Principal Secretary, Governor of Maharashtra & Ors. (2023) SCC OnLine SC 607.
72Nabam Rebia and Ors. v Deputy Speaker and Ors. (2016) 8 SCC 1. 234 PARTH BIRLA
AND ANANYA BADAYA NAVIGATING THE INTRICACIES OF THE DEFECTION CONUNDRUM
functions of the Speaker. The Deputy Speaker did not exercise his power to
adjudicate on the disqualification petitions. Meanwhile, Mr. Rahul Narwerkar was
appointed as the Speaker and now the newly appointed speaker shall exercise its
jurisdiction over the matter. Thus, Nabam Rebia does not apply to the present
factual matrix. It was found by the Court that the judgment of Kihoto Hollohan73
was in conflict with Nabam Rebia, as in that case, it was held that the
independence and impartiality of the Speaker cannot be put into question when
the Speaker is adjudicating the proceeding under the Tenth Schedule. Moreover,
it was also found by the majority that the Nabam Rebia case did not take into
account the effect and import of Article 18174 into consideration, which
envisages that the Speaker shall not preside over the Legislative Assembly when
a resolution against him is pending. Thus, the Court was of the opinion to refer
Nabam Rebia to a Seven-Judge Bench. For the second issue, the Court again
referred to the case of Kihoto Hollohan, wherein the Speaker was declared as a
Tribunal and its exercise of power under the Tenth Schedule is subject to the
jurisdiction of Articles 136, 226 and 227 of the Constitution. The Court further
observed that the jurisdiction of the Court is not completely excluded as per
Para 6(2) of the anti-defection law, but it does restrict the scope of judicial
review when the decision is pending before the Speaker.75 Therefore, it is clear
from the aforementioned case that the Speaker solely has the authority to decide
on the disqualification petition. The Petitioner has placed reliance on the case
Rajendra Singh Rana v. Swami Prasad Maurya,76 wherein the Apex Court used its
exceptional power to decide upon the disqualification petition. But in the
present case, the Court declined to rely on the case since the Speaker already
pronounced its decision over the disqualifications. It 73Kihoto Hollohan v
Zachillu (1992) SCR (1) 686. 74The Constitution of India, 1950 art 181. 75Kihoto
Hollohan v Zachillu (1992) SCR (1) 686. 76Rajendra Singh Rana And Ors v Swami
Prasad Maurya and Ors (2007) 4 SCC 270. 235 VOL XIII NLIU LAW REVIEW ISSUE I
relied on the case of Shrimath Balasaheb Patil v. Speaker, Karnataka Legislative
Assembly77 in which it was opined that the Speaker should not be reposed of
trust and confidence if they are unable to be neutral and impartial and favours
their political party, however initially, the Speaker shall adjudicate the
disqualification petition. In deciding whether the Speaker has the power to
appoint the whip and the leader of the party, the Court initially decided if
they could interfere with legislative proceedings78 and referred to Article
21279 of the Constitution which restricts interference of the judiciary in
legislative proceedings. However, in Special Reference No. 1 of 1964 (Powers,
Privileges and Immunities of State Legislatures),80 a seven-judge Bench noted
that Article 212 is not a bar to judicial review in cases of illegal and
unconstitutional procedure adopted in Assembly. The Court opined that “The
procedural infringements would vitiate the proceedings based on their purpose
and the impact of their infringement on the democratic functioning of
Parliament.”81 Thus, the Court once again upheld the interference of the
judiciary as it was deemed necessary for the sustenance of Parliamentary
Democracy. Moreover, the Court examined the terms political party and
legislative party. As per the opinion of the Bench, the Tenth Schedule would
become inapplicable if these phrases were used interchangeably. Para 4 of the
Tenth Schedule makes a clear demarcation between both these terms. It specifies
that a political party, not the legislative party, shall appoint the whip and
the leader. If it is asserted that the legislative party appoints the leader and
the whip, then the umbilical cord which connects the whip to the political party
would be severed. Thus, it 77Shrimanth Balasaheb Patil v Hon’ble Speaker,
Karnataka Legislative Assembly (2020) 2 SCC 595. 78The Constitution of India,
1950, Tenth Schedule, para 6(2). 79The Constitution of India, 1950 art 212.
80Keshav Singh v Speaker AIR 1965 SC 745. 81Shubhash Desai v Principal
Secretary, Governor of Maharashtra & Ors. (2023) SCC OnLine SC 607. 236 PARTH
BIRLA AND ANANYA BADAYA NAVIGATING THE INTRICACIES OF THE DEFECTION CONUNDRUM
would mean that the legislators would rely on the political party for getting a
ticket and voter’s affiliation, but later they would disconnect themselves and
work as a group of MLAs who no longer are in allegiance to the political party.
From the above analysis, it was held that the Speaker must recognise the whip
and leader of the political party which was appointed by the political party
after making necessary inquiries. Consequently, the Court concluded that the
Speaker’s decision to recognise the decision of the faction and Shinde as the
leader of the political party was illegal. The fourth issue revolves around the
possible implication of the deletion of Split. As discussed earlier, the
exception of Split was removed from the Tenth Schedule in 2003. Thus, if a Split
occurs in a party, neither faction could take the defence that they are a
political party in the event of each faction filing a petition for
disqualification of members of another faction.82 The members of different
factions can exist simultaneously in the Parliament if one of the factions comes
under the exception of Para 4(1)(a), i.e. Merger. However, if one of the
factions fulfils the conditions of disqualification and they are unable to take
any of the defences, they would stand disqualified. If they are not
disqualified, then the deletion of Para 3 would become worthless since it is
trite law that what cannot be done directly cannot be permitted to be done
indirectly.83 Moreover, the Speaker should not make his decision on the sole
criteria of the majority of the House in deciding the case of which group is a
political party. The structure of leadership outside the Legislative Assembly is
also a crucial point that the Speaker must take into consideration. Lastly, the
Court emphasized the Governor’s action of ordering a floor test and inviting
Shinde to form the government. The court referred to 82‘Key Takeaways of SC’s
Maharashtra Verdict’ (Civils Daily, 12 May 2023)
<https://www.civilsdaily.com/news/key-takeaways-of-scs-maharashtra-verdict/>
accessed 13 December 2023. 83Delhi Administration v Gurdip Singh Uban and Ors.
(2000) 7 SCC 296. 237 VOL XIII NLIU LAW REVIEW ISSUE I SR Bommai v. Union of
India,84 in which it was held that the Governor cannot claim that the Council of
Ministers has lost the majority in the house and subsequently require them to
prove the majority in the House. Moreover, the Court also relied on the Shivraj
Singh Chauhan case,85 wherein it was held that the Governor should use its
discretionary power in such a manner that reliance should be placed on objective
materials and reasons that are relevant and germane to the discretion, not
extraneous. In the present case, since there was no objective material with the
Governor that Chief Minister Thackeray had lost the confidence of the House.
Further, at the highest, it can only be concluded that a faction of MLAs was
dissatisfied with the policy decision of the party. Hence, it was concluded by
the Bench that the decision to conduct a floor test was unlawful. It was also
opined that the floor test should not be used as a method to resolve internal
disputes of the party, and the Constitution of the party must be relied on to
establish a truce between the dissenting factions.86 The Court further provided
that if Thackeray had faced the floor test or refrained from resigning from the
post of the Chief Minister, this Court could have considered the grant of the
remedy of reinstating the government headed by him.87 It was also clarified by
the Court that the disqualification proceeding does not bar an MLA from
participating in a floor test. The Petitioners also contended that Shinde was
barred from becoming the Chief Minister as per Article 164(1B)88 of the
Constitution. The Court clarified that Article 164(1B) is a hindrance for a
member who has been disqualified under Para 2 of the Tenth 84SR Bommai v Union
of India (1994) 3 SCC 1. 85Shivraj Singh Chouhan v Union of India (2020) 17 SCC
1. 86Ananthakrishnan G and Omkar Gokhale, ‘Governor asking Thackeray for floor
test not justified, but can’t restore govt: SC’ The Indian Express (Mumbai, New
Delhi, 12 May 2023)
<https://indianexpress.com/article/india/governor-asking-thackeray
for-floor-test-not-justified-but-cant-restore-govt-sc-8604768/> December 2023.
accessed 12 87Shubhash Desai v Principal Secretary, Governor of Maharashtra &
Ors. (2023) SCC OnLine SC 607. 88The Constitution of India, 1950 art 164(1B).
238 PARTH BIRLA AND ANANYA BADAYA NAVIGATING THE INTRICACIES OF THE DEFECTION
CONUNDRUM Schedule. Since the seat of Chief Minister felt vacant and Shinde was
not disqualified from the House, and additionally enjoyed the support of the
majority MLAs, the Governor’s decision to invite Shinde to form the government
was justified. VI. DECODING THE OBSERVATIONS OF THE SUPREME COURT JUDGEMENT It
was an arduous effort by the Supreme Court to answer the complexities of the
Maharashtra Crisis. However, the Court failed to take into account the
prevailing circumstances and practicalities of the anti-defection law. The
authors would like to term it untimely justice facilitated by the Court against
the issue raised. One of the major highlights of the pronouncement was referring
the Nabam Rebia judgment to the Seven-Judge Bench to further deliberate over the
said verdict. It is considered an essential move since the verdict was making
the provisions of the anti-defection law redundant and inconsistent with the
earlier precedents. Further, while the Court asserted that the power to
adjudicate upon the disqualification proceedings shall vest with the Speaker
alone, the reasoning towards the same seems unconvincing. It is deeply rooted in
the Indian Constitution that the Speaker is an impartial body or position that
shall be devoid of any personal bias towards the party’s interests. Even the
Tenth Schedule provides an exception to the disqualification when the Speaker
assumes office, leaving party membership, and it can be positively construed
that the Indian speaker is aligned on the lines of a British Speaker i.e., free
from any bias.89 However, it is pertinent to note that the sanctity of this
position is in shambles, especially after the growing instances of mass
defection. Since the Speaker belongs to the ruling party, it exerts significant
control over the functioning of the 2021) 89Pracin Jain Academy, ‘Once a
speaker, always a speaker!’ The Times of India (18 January
<https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/readersblog/pracin-jain
academy/once-a-speaker-always-a-speaker-29142/> accessed 29 August 2023. 239 VOL
XIII NLIU LAW REVIEW ISSUE I Legislature, particularly through the Speaker,
whose authority is broad and unquestionable. This includes the ability to
postpone decisions on disqualification petitions brought by betrayed opposition
parties for months or even years if it serves the ruling party’s interests. For
instance, in 2020, the Speaker of the Manipur Assembly did not decide on the
defection petition for three years90 and the Supreme Court ordered the Speaker
to decide the petition within three months.91 Cases of the Speaker failing to
act on the disqualification of members are on the rise. This, coupled with the
fact that the anti-defection law makes no mention of a deadline despite
expressly stipulating that a member who deserted their party shall be
disqualified, seems to create difficulties. This is because, Speakers have taken
advantage of this oversight to grant themselves a pocket veto over the
procedure.92 Although the Courts have compelled them to take action within
time,93 they have only had sporadic success. Moreover, the deletion of the
exception of Split in 2003 was termed as a reaction by the government to stop
the defections that were toppling many State governments. However, in the
present case, there are two factions of the Sena and the delay in deciding the
disqualification petition once again led to a situation wherein two factions
emerged from a single party, without any actual disqualification. The above
situation has rendered the 91st Amendment ineffective and the issue of Speakers’
90Krishnadas Rajagopal, ‘SC again highlights taking away disqualification power
from The Hindu (New Delhi, 21 January 2020)
<https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/sc-asks-parliament-to-rethink-powers
of-the-speaker-in-disqualification-of-ministers/article30615269.ece> accessed 29
August 2023. 91Keisham Meghachandra Singh v Hon’ble Speaker Manipur Legislative
Assembly and Others (2020) SCC OnLine SC 55. 92Shoaib Daniyal, ‘What is the
Anti-Defection Law and how will it shape the Maharashtra crisis?’ (Scroll, 23
June 2022) <https://scroll.in/article/1026761/what
is-the-anti-defection-law-and-how-will-it-shape-the-maharashtra-crisis> accessed
23 June 2022. 93Indira Nehru Gandhi v Raj Narain (1976) 2 SCR 347; Brundaban
Nayak v Election Commission of India and Anr. (1965) 3 SCR 53; Pema Khandu and
Ors v Speaker, Arunachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly and Ors (2016) SCC OnLine
Gau 284. 240 PARTH BIRLA AND ANANYA BADAYA NAVIGATING THE INTRICACIES OF THE
DEFECTION CONUNDRUM Split continues. Moreover, the exception of the merger still
subsists under the Tenth Schedule and if the faction of Shinde opts to merge
with BJP then the disqualification petition will also turn out to be
infructuous. Thus, the removal of the Split has done no good to the contemporary
scenario. The rationale given by the Court for not reinstating Uddhav Thackeray
as the Chief Minister seems righteous. However, when this crisis is seen as a
whole, it can be seen that the situation, in the first place, was created by a
Bench of this Court which later was found impossible to be resolved by this very
Court. In June 2022, the Vacation Bench of the Supreme Court provided interim
orders on two issues. The first order extended the time for the MLAs of the
Shinde faction to respond to the disqualification notices that were pending
against them.94 The second order, which is the primary reason for the conundrum,
was that the Court refused to stay the floor test which was directed by the
Governor.95 The orders created a double effect, wherein it not only allowed the
floor test, but it also allowed the Shinde faction to take part in the floor
test without facing the immediate fear of disqualification. Thus, it would be
disingenuous to separate Thackeray’s decision of resigning from this
judicially-created context.96 Speakers’ 94Krishnadas Rajagopal, ‘SC again
highlights taking away disqualification power from The Hindu (New Delhi, 21
January 2020)
<https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/sc-asks-parliament-to-rethink-powers
of-the-speaker-in-disqualification-of-ministers/article30615269.ece> accessed 29
August 2023. 95Ayushi Saraogi, ‘SC Refuses to Stay Maharashtra Governor’s Call
for Floor Test’ (Supreme Court Observer, 29 June 2022)
<https://www.scobserver.in/journal/sc
refuses-to-stay-maharashtra-governors-call-for-floor-test/> accessed 29 August
2023. 96Gautam Bhatia, ‘The Supreme Court’s Maharashtra Political Crisis
Judgment – I: To Be Hoisted on Someone Else’s Petard’ (Indian Constitutional Law
and Philosophy, 11 May 2023) <https://indconlawphil.wordpress.com/2023/05/11/the
supreme-courts-maharashtra-political-crisis-judgment-i-to-be-hoisted-on-someone
elses-petard/> accessed 29 August 2023. 241 VOL XIII NLIU LAW REVIEW ISSUE I
VII. CONCLUSION While the conundrum of disqualification still persists in
Maharashtra, the Election Commission has decided that the Shiv Sena symbol would
be possessed by the Shinde Faction based on the test of majority, as the faction
has got support of 76% of MLAs.97 The Commission made scathing remarks towards
the Sena faction and observed that “it (Shiv Sena constitution) has been
mutilated to undemocratically appoint people from a coterie as office bearers
without any election at all.”98 The Supreme Court had given 10 January 2024 as
deadline to the Speaker for deciding 34 disqualification petitions that the two
opposing Shiv Sena factions had filed against one another in an attempt to
disqualify a total of 54 MLAs, as a result of the party’s 2022 split.99 The
Speaker (Mr.Rahul Narwekar) held that the Shinde faction is the real Shiv Sena
due to the overwhelming majority of 37 of 55 MLAs. On procedural grounds, he
also denied the disqualification petitions filed against the MLAs of Thackrey
faction.100 The decision further legitimises the Maharashtra government, and the
authors feel that the decision was on expected lines, by virtue of the Indian
Speakers being party’s marionette. Thus overall, the current dynamics of Indian
politics make it clear that anti-defection laws do not cater to contemporary
standards, be it the (New 97The Hindu Bureau, ‘Eknath Shinde faction gets Shiv
Sena name, symbol’ The Hindu Delhi, 17 February 2023)
<https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/eknath-shinde-faction-recognised-as
real-shiv-sena-allotted-bow-and-arrow-symbol/article66521586.ece> accessed 29
August 2023. 98ibid. 10’ Deccan 99Mrityunjay Bose, ‘Shiv Sena disqualification
case: Landmark verdict expected on Jan Herald (Maharashtra, 8 January
<https://www.deccanherald.com/india/maharashtra/verdict-in-shiv-sena
disqualification-case-by-jan-10 28399-18> accessed 15 January 2024. 2024)
100Explained Desk, ‘Maharashtra Speaker gives verdict on Shiv Sena split: what
was the case before him’ The Indian Express (New Delhi, 11 January 2024)
<https://indianexpress.com/article/explained/explained-politics/maharastra-shiv
sena-split-speaker-disqualification-9103871/> accessed 15 January 2024. 242
PARTH BIRLA AND ANANYA BADAYA NAVIGATING THE INTRICACIES OF THE DEFECTION
CONUNDRUM controversial position of the Speaker or the horse-trading taking
place for toppling governments. In addition to the Tenth Schedule itself being a
delayed response to the issue of defection, its provisions further provide
leeway to the ruling party by giving disproportionate power to its Speaker.
Furthermore, contrary to the intention of the enactment, en bloc defections
started taking place in place of individual defections. The authors opine that
the mandate of the public has been taken for granted by the political parties,
who tweak the defection law in a manner that suits their interests. For
instance, in the present case, not only were the number of defectors higher,
they switched the government without even facing any consequence. Additionally,
this matter went to the Apex Court, where timely justice was denied and the
final verdict of the Court rendered the interim orders of the same Court
ineffective, which also makes us think that the Judiciary has contributed to
this crisis. From the above discussion, it is crystal clear that courts have
failed to match the pace of political developments in the country. It thus
ensues from the discussion so far that modern defection politics can overturn
the will of the people and our beloved representatives happily accept money and
ministerial position as allurements to defect from their party. One possible
solution that was proposed was that the defectors not be allowed to assume
ministerial positions for some years.101 It could also be ensured that a Speaker
in India possesses the characteristics of an American Speaker rather than a
British one. On the issue of delay, it has been observed by the Court that
“There have been so many cases where there are delays by the Speaker and when
such cases come to this court, we are told that you cannot pass any order till
the Speaker decides. This has been a common experience.”102 101Dipankar Sarkar,
‘How politicians normalized defections’ Mint (25 March 2019)
<https://www.livemint.com/opinion/columns/opinion-how-politicians-normalized
defections-1553428879362.html> accessed 29 August 2023. 102Umang Poddar,
‘Explainer: How speakers are undermining the anti-defection law by simply
sitting on petitions’ (Scroll, 14 December 2021)
<https://scroll.in/article/1012515/explainer-how-speakers-are-undermining-the-anti
243 VOL XIII NLIU LAW REVIEW ISSUE I Therefore, an impartial Tribunal may be
constituted which shall entertain all the disqualification petitions in a
time-bound manner and it shall be presided by a Retired Supreme Court or High
Court Judge for effective delivery of justice. This could be a potential
game-changer to check the Speaker’s misuse of power and shall also ensure a time
bound redressal mechanism for the betrayed party. Not only this, the failure of
the Supreme Court to lay down some guidelines for the office of Speaker poses a
question as to why Courts allow such efforts to murder democracy. Another
peculiar situation arose in Maharashtra, which witnessed a ‘Split’ without a
merger thereby debilitating the political dynamics of Maharashtra. NCP senior
leader Ajit Pawar parted from the NCP with some MLAs and took oath as the deputy
Chief minister, with many NCP leaders getting inducted into the cabinet.103 The
faction however confirmed that they had not merged with BJP and they are an
independent faction. The NCP situation once again highlights that the existing
law on defection only addresses ‘splits and mergers’ within political parties,
leaving ‘splits without merger’ unanswered.104 Thus, there is also a dire need
for amendments in the current Tenth Schedule to resolve the lacuna of the split
without a merger. It can thus be concluded that though the anti-defection law
has been introduced with a reverent motive, its implementation negates its very
objective and thus, the authors assert that there is an urgent requirement to
introduce new amendments to revamp it.
defection-law-by-simply-sitting-on-petitions> accessed 29 August 2023. 103‘Ajit
Pawar appointed deputy CM, 8 other NCP MLAs take oath as ministers in Eknath
Shinde government: Key developments’ The Times of India (2 July 2023)
<https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/ajit-pawar-9-other-ncp-mlas-to-take
oath-in-shinde-government/articleshow/101432071.cms?from=mdr> accessed 29 August
2023. 104Chinmay Bendre and Vishal Chaudhari, ‘Defects writ large in the
anti-defection law’ (The Leaflet, 6 August 2023)
<https://theleaflet.in/defects-writ-large-in-the-anti defection-law/> accessed
29 August 2023. 244
